Hey guys, welcome back to the course.
Ok, so at this point, what do we know?
We know that computers are,
in their essence, basically just these machines
that are designed to solve problems,
but we often forget that without humans to operate them,
they're actually just dumb boxes of metal.
I know they call it a smartphone,
or a smart watch, or even a smart fridge,
but without someone actually driving them,
giving them input information, they don't
actually do anything but sit there and rust.
They need your information and they
need instructions in order to compute
and to give you something of value, and that's
at least, of course, until computers
get smart enough to learn how to compute
themselves, in which case... God save us.
I think that's actually the plot to Terminator.
So that's something to keep in mind
as you dive deeper into
computer technology and into computer programming.
Through whatever program or application
you're using, you're literally
giving a computer X information and
telling it to do Y with that information.
Your information trickles down to the
core components of a computer
and says, "Do this," and the computer
says, "All right, I'll do it, lay off."
It's just a thing essentially waiting for you
to give commands to it to do something,
which brings us to the next question which is worth asking.
How does a computer actually do
what you just bossed it to do?
What is going on inside of that stupid box on your desk?
Well, the first thing we need to understand
is that every time you
ask your computer to process some instruction,
let's say I was typing "Evan Kimbrell"
into Google, which is something I often do laying in bed at night,
or let's say you're double-clicking the
Minesweeper icon to play that game with mines,
you are communicating indirectly with what's called
the "central processing unit"
of your computer, also known as the CPU.
The CPU is the core of the computer that
executes instructions at the absolute lowest level.
A computer processor is where the problems actually get solved.
How does a CPU actually work?
No one knows.
Not even Bill Gates, who once said, and I quote,
"The CPU is that thing that makes your computer do stuff."
Well said, Bill.
We're not really going to get deep into how a CPU works, because
it's actually an immensely complicated process
and knowing that process
is not really going to benefit you in any way
to become a computer programmer
or just to better understand programming.
If you insisted, I'll give you a somewhat helpful explanation,
just don't quote me on it later.
CPUs, if you haven't seen them before,
if you ever opened up your computer,
it's those tiny little silicon boxes, little squares,
and they're usually attached to
what's called the motherboard - it's that big green board
with a bunch of wires and little nodes.
These little squares are so complex that there are actually only
two major companies in the world that can
make them for personal computers.
The first one is known as Intel
and the second one is known as AMD.
Within this tiny little square of silicon,
there are thousands and thousands
of what are called transistors that are "microns" in diameter.
Yes, I know your face just glazed over when I said
micro-gadgets and transisto-whatevers,
but a transistor is actually a lot easier to think of.
A transistor is actually just a wire
that can transfer electricity, that is it.
And a micron is an extremely small unit of measurement.
How small? Well, a piece of human hair
is about 100 microns in diameter,
and the world's smallest CPU transistor is about 6 microns.
Actually, I'm joking, it was 6 microns back in 1974.
Now they're about 0.05 of 1 micron.
I know, it's insanity, and it's really hard to comprehend.
Just know that they're extremely complex.
What CPUs essentially do is they take
electricity and commands,
and then through a very strange process of alternating transistors,
those tiny little things that transfer information,
it can actually process information.
I know, this is all jibberish I'm telling you,
but think of it kind of like this.
You have a calculator. A processor is like a calculator
in its own way, except just smaller.
It transfers electricity in circles, which we actually call a "clock,"
and it's measured in what we call MIPS,
or millions of instructions per second.
If you guys have ever, if you know anything
about computers, ever heard
the term "overclocked" or "underclocked"?
That is a way of speeding up your processor or slowing it down.
Now, a processor can add, it can subtract, it can multiply,
it can do really whatever needs to be done
depending on whatever you send it.
If a processor were Sesame Street,
it'd probably be the Cookie Monster,
and this is the part where he gobbles up
all the cookies and then
screams out the alphabet or something.
So that is roughly how calculations and information get processed.
Now, of course, most times when
you're working with a computer,
you'll want to save whatever you're doing,
so it doesn't disappear forever.
Now, that is why computers come with another crucial component we call memory.
Memory is essentially the way that computers keep
information on file without it disappearing.
Computers have permanent memory built right into it
as the form of what's called a hard drive,
which means you can save something,
turn the computer off, and that information
will actually stay there, and when you turn it back on,
it will come back.
Hard drivers work very similar to the way
that cassettes or CDs work.
Again, do you need to know how that works,
even in one deeper level? No.
Computer hard drives most often consist
of a circular magnetic plate,
hilariously called a platter, and it spins like a CD,
and has information written on it,
and removed by that read-write head,
which is actually called an actuator arm,
so it hits it constantly when it needs to read
the information or change the information.
Yeah, I know, it's not super useful, but just
think of it like an old Sony Walkman.
You can store information on CDs,
and when you put them in your walkman they spin,
and then the information gets read off of them.
They're just like that, but full of a lot more information.
Think of it as the new and improved Cookie Monster
who is able to control himself and,
instead of immediately devouring all the cookies
you give him, he stows some
away in the pantry in case you ask for them back.
But what about information that you need to store
but you don't necessarily need to store forever?
Well, the computer handles that too
and it's through a process called RAM,
which stands for Random Access Memory.
RAM, Random Access Memory, is used to
quickly store and access information
that doesn't necessarily have to be remembered forever,
just for the duration of whatever program you're running.
Let's say, for example, you open up your web browser,
you go to a website, as you often do.
The images, the text, the animations,
and whatever else is in the browser,
it needs to be displayed at this moment, and in order to do that,
it has to be stored somewhere temporarily.
Where does it gets stored?
It gets stored in your RAM.
So as soon as you exit out of that program, your computer says,
"We don't need these images and this text anymore,"
and it leaves your RAM, and frees it up
so you can use other applications.
So have you ever had one of your computers
get really, really slow when
you have too many tabs open on your Google Chrome?
Well, that's obviously because you're running out of RAM,
and the system has to wait for RAM to free up
before processing or loading the next thing.
That's why your computer freezes and then comes undone later.
So when someone says,
"Oh wow, Firefox is such a light browser,"
whether it's true or not, what they mean
is that it doesn't have a lot of
unnecessary processes, and because of that,
when you run it, it this takes up less RAM.
What that means at the end of the day is that
you can have more browsers open,
and if you have commitment issues, you can decide to
just keep and hoard all of your tabs, like I do.
As a programmer, your basic function is that you're going to be
giving the computer instructions, and you know how to do it
in a way that the computer can understand.
Back in the day, the way that programmers
actually sent instructions to a computer,
it happened the "hands-on" way.
So programmers would literally shove these
giant stacks of cards into giant machines
that were actually the size of rooms,
and the patterns of the holes
punched onto the card would tell the machine what to do.
So punch cards were actually the original programs.
Later on, when the British mathematician Benedict Cumberbatch
made his breakthrough discovery of the "stored program" concept,
programmers could suddenly design machines
that remembered programs.
No more need to shove punch cards into them all the time.
Now, 80 years later, humans still can't remember anything,
and computers can remember everything,
while being small enough to fit in your pocket.
So, there you go.
You put a CPU (a central processing unit)
and two different types of memory together,
and you have the building blocks for
a good problem-solving machine,
a machine that needs a human to give it instructions,
or else it's just an expensive paperweight.
The next lecture, we're going to talk about how computers get
the information they need, and how they
shoot it out, so we can use it.
All right, see you in the next lecture!